>> Woodruff: BLISTERING WINDS
TOPPING 70 MILES PER HOUR DUMP
MORE THAN TWO FEET OF SNOW ON
NEW ENGLAND.
BUT THE BLIZZARD PACKS LESS OF A
PUNCH THAN EXPECTED IN NEW YORK
CITY.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, THE
WHITE HOUSE SIGNALS MORE
OFFSHORE DRILLING IN THE
ATLANTIC, BUT AS CRUDE PRICES
SINK, NORTH DAKOTA PRODUCERS
SCALE BACK AND WAIT OUT THE
FREEZE ON THE OIL BOOM.
>> NO ONE WANTS TO LOSE MONEY
DRILLING AN OIL WELL.
SO EVERYONE IS GOING TO PULL
BACK BECAUSEF WH OERE OIL PRICES
ARE RIGHT NOW.
>> THIS ISN'T THE USUAL
SUSPECTS, TO USE AN OLD PHRASE,
SOME OF THIS IS NEW PEOPLE
COMING INTO THE TERRORIST CAUSE.
>> Woodruff: THE THREAT OF
HOMEGROWTERRN OR IN EUROPE AND
THE DISPUTE OVER HOW TO STOP
VIOLENT ATTACKS.
>> TO TELL THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY
THAT YOU HAVE TO SPY ON YOUR
CHILDREN
OR YOU THINK THAT THERE IS
SOMETHING WRONG YOU HAVE TO
REPORT AND ALL OF THIS, THIS IS
NOT HELPFUL.
>> Woodruff: AND, WHY WHAT YOU
SAY MATTERS, THE MEN AND WOMEN
WHO FIGHT TO KEEP DYING
LANGUAGES ALIVE.
>> LANGUAGE IS THE WAY WE THINK
IF YOU BEGIN TO THINK IN ANOTHER
LANGUAGE THAT'S FINE.
BUT IF YOU HAVE TO LOSE THE WAY
THAT YOUR FAMILY HAS BEEN
SPEAKING.
THAT'S LOSING WHO YOU ARE.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: NEW ENGLAND FACED A
NEAR-HURRICANE OF WIND AND SNOW
TODAY, BUT STATES TO THE SOUTH
WERE SPARED THE WORST.
MEGAN THOMPSON OF "THE WEEKEND
NEWSHOUR" REPORTS AGAIN FROM NEW
YORK.
>> Reporter: HOWLING GUSTS AND
DRIFTING SNOW GREETED
BOSTON AND SURROUNDING TOWNS
THIS MORNING.
>> IT'S REALLY WINDY.
IT'S CURRENTLY A BLIZZARD.
I WASN'T EXPECTING MUCH WHEN I
WOKE UP THIS MORNING BUT HERE WE
ARE.
>> Reporter: THE STORM STRUCK
WITH FULL FORCE LAST NIGHT AND
KEPT GOING THROUGH THE DAY.
BOSTON WAS ON THE WAY TO GETTING
AT LEAST two FEET OF SNOW.
WINDS GUSTED TO 75 MILES AN HOUR
AT CAPE COD AND BEACH TOWNS
FLOODED AS HEAVY STORM SURGES
ROLLED IN.
AT MIDDAY, MASSACHUSETTS
GOVERNOR CHARLIE BAKER WARNED
THERE WAS MORE TO COME.
>> WE FULLY EXPECT THAT THERE
ARE PARTS OF EASTERN AND CENTRAL
MASSACHUSETTS WHERE PEOPLE MAY
GET AS MUCH AS ANOTHER FIVE TO
TEN INCHES OF SNOW ON TOP OF
WHAT THEY ALREADY HAVE.
THE DRIFTING CONTINUES TO BE AN
ISSUE, THE BLOWING. THERE ARE
DRIFTS NOW AS HIGH AS FOUR,
FIVE, SIX FEET IN MANY PLACES.
>> Reporter: ELSEWHERE, BLIZZARD
CONDITIONS BURIED THE EASTERN
TIP OF LONG ISLAND AND PARTS OF
RHODE ISLAND AND CONNECTICUT.
MEANWHILE, THOUSANDS OF FLIGHT
CANCELLATIONS PROMISED TO SNARL
AIR TRAVEL FOR DAYS TO COME,
CREATING A RIPPLE EFFECT AROUND
THE COUNTRY.
BUT FARTHER SOUTH, SNOWFALL WAS
FAR LESS THAN PREDICTED, AS THE
STORSYSTM EM SHIFTED NEARLY 100
MILES EAST OF ITS PROJECTED
TRACK.
DESPITE DIRE FORECASTS, NEW YORK
CITY WAS LARGELY SPARED THE
BRUNT OF THIS NOR'EASTER,
GETTING LESS THAN A FOOT OF SNOW
RATHER THAN A RECORD TALLY.
OFFICIALS LIFTED TRAVEL BANS
AROUND THE CITY EARLY THIS
MORNING AND BY MID-DAY, SUBWAY
AND BUS SERVICE IN THE BIG APPLE
WAS RETURNING TO AT LEAST
WEEKEND SERVICE LEVELS.
THAT LEFT SOME NEW YORKERS
WONDERING TODAY WHAT THE FUSS
WAS ABOUT.
>> TURNED OUT TO BE NOTHING.
I MEAN IT'S SOME ACCUMULATION
BUT NOT WHAT THEY EXPECTED IT TO
BE.
YOU EXPECTED IT TO BE A LOT
WORSE.
AND I'VE SEEN WORSE DUSTINGS
THAN THIS, SO, THAT'S NEW YORK
FOR YOU."
>> Reporter: ONE FORECASTER WITH
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
EVEN TWEETED AN APOLOGY FOR NOT
GETTING IT RIGHT THIS TIME.
BUT NEW YORK GOVERNOR ANDREW
CUOMO DISMISSED CRITICISM OF THE
EMERGENCY MEASURES.
>> HERE VIRTUALLY EVERY STATE
MADE THE SAME DECISIONS, NEW
JERSEY, NEW YORK, CONNECTICUT,
MASSACHUSETTS, WE ALL MADE THE
SAME DECISIONS.
AND SOMETIMES THE PREDICTIONS
TURN OUT TO BE MORE OR LESS
ACCURATE.
AND THAT IS THE NATURE OF THE
BEAST.
>> Reporter: AND NEW YORK CITY
E CALLS HE MADE TO
SHUT DOWN SUBWAYS AND BUSES LAST
NIGHT.
>> THESE WERE THE RIGHT
PRECAUTIONS TO TAKE.
THEY WORKED.
OBVIOUSLY, THEY'RE GONNA SPEED
OUR ABILITY TO GET BACK TO
NORMAL.
IN SITUATIONS LIKE THIS, YOU
CAN'T BE A MONDAY MORNING
QUARTERBACK ON SOMETHING LIKE
THE WEATHER.
>> Reporter: IN THE END, FOR
MANY IN NEW YORK AND ELSEWHERE,
IT CAME DOWN TO A CASE OF:
BETTER TO BE SAFE THAN SORRY.
>> WE'VE BEEN THROUGH A COUPLE
OF HURRICANES.
AND WHEN THEY KIND OF MAKE A
CALL LIKE THAT, IT'S BETTER JUST
TO STAY AHOMET  AND LISTEN TO
THEM, WHAT THEY SAY.
SO AT THAT POINT, WE BOTH WAKE
UP, AND WE GO, WHERE'S ALL THE
SNOW?
AND THERE'S LIKE THIS.
T WEBU'RE STILL HAPPY, BECAUSE
WE'RE GOING TO THE PARK AND PLAY
IN THE PARK WITH LITTLE SKIPPER
BOY HERE!
>> Reporter: FOR THE NEWSHOUR,
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON REPORTING
FROM NEW YORK CITY.
>> Woodruff: AND FROM ONE
EXTREME TO THE OTHER:
THERE WAS RECORD HEAT TODAY IN
THE NORTHERN PLAINS.
FORECASTS CALLED FOR
TEMPERATURES IN THE 70'S IN
SOUTH DAKOTA.
NORTHEAST AN ESTIMATED A BILLION
DOLLARS IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY.
AND WALL STREET TOOK IT ON THE
CHIN TODAY, TOO-- FROM WARNINGS
OF WEAKER CORPORATE PROFITS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 291 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
THE NASDAQ FELL 90 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,681.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 SLID 27, TO
2029.
A GRIM NEW COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN
FOR TWO HOSTAGES HELD BY
"ISLAMIC STATE" MILITANTS IN
SYRIA.
THE GROUP WARNED THAT A JAPANESE
MAN, KENJI GOTO, AND A CAPTURED
JORDANIAN PILOT WIL B
BY TOMORROW AFTERNOON.
AN ONLINE MESSAGE SHOWED A PHOTO
OF KENJI GOTO HOLDING AN IMAGE
OF THE JORDANIAN, OVER A
RECORDED STATEMENT BY GOTO.
>> I ONLY HAVE 24 HOURS LEFT TO
>> Woodruff: "ISLAMIC STATE"
MILITANTS MURDERED ANOTHER
JAPANESE HOSTAGE OVER THE
WEEKEND.
THEY'RE NOW DEMANDING THE
RELEASE OF AN IRAQI WOMAN
SENTENCED TO DEATH IN JORDAN FOR
A 2005 TERROR ATTACK.
GUNMEN STORMED A LUXURY HOTEL IN
TRIPOLI, LIBYA TODAY, KILLING
FIVE GUARDS AND FOUR FOREIGNERS.
ONE VICTIM WAS AN AMERICAN
SECURITY CONTRACTOR.
A FACTION LINKED TO THE "ISLAMIC
STATE" GROUP CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY.
THE ATTACK STARTED IN THE EARLY
MORNING AND INCLUDED A CAR
BOMBING.
AFTER AN HOURS-LONG STANDOFF,
THE GUNMEN SET OFF GRENADES
KILLING THEMSELVES.
A U.N. RELIEF AGENCY HAS
SUSPENDED AID TO PALESTINIANS
WHO LOST THEIR HOMES IN THE GAZA
WAR LAST SUMMER.
OFFICIALS SAY THE U.N. PROGRAM
RAN OUT OF MONEY BECAUSE DONOR
NATIONS GAVE ONLY $135 MILLION
DOLLARS.
THEY HAD PLEDGED $720 MILLION.
IN POLAND TODAY, A SOMBER
REMEMBRANCE MARKED THE
LIBERATION OF "AUSCHWITZ", THE
NAZI DEATH CAMP WHERE JEWS AND
OTHERS WERE SYSTEMATICALLY
MURDERED.
IT WAS OVERRUN, 70 YEARS AGO
TODAY BY THE SOVIET ARMY.
PAUL DAVIES OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: ENCLOSED IN A GIANT
TENT, THE GATES TO THE WORLD'S
MOST NOTORIOUS DEATH FACTORY AS
300 OF THOSE WHO SURVIVED ITS
EVIL GATHERED TO REMEMBER MORE
THAN A MILLION WHO DID NOT.
>> HOW CAN ONE ERASE THE SIGHT
OF HUMAN SKELETONS?
JUST SKIN AND BONES BUT STILL
ALIVE.
>> Reporter: THESE STORIES OF
LOSS AND SUFFERING MAKE THE MOST
PAINFUL OF HEARING, BUT THERE IS
A DETERMINATION THAT THESE
STORIES AND THE LESSONS THEY
CARRY WILL NOT BE LOST.
DIRECTOR STEVEN SPIELBERG HAS
BEEN COLLECTING THE STORIES AND
TODAY HE RELEASED A FACTUAL FILM
TO CONSTANTLY REMIND THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: THERE WAS
APPRECIATIVE APPLAUSE.
BUT THIS WAS NOT A DAY FOR
CELEBRITY OR FOR THE HEADS OF
STATE PRESENT.
IT WAS FOR THE SURVIVORS WHO
BEGAN EARLY THIS MORNING
BRINGING THEIR WREATHS AND THEIR
MEMORIES TO THE CAMP'S NOTORIOUS
WALL OF DEATH WHERE MANY WHO'D
ESCAPE THE GAS CHAMBERS WERE
EXECUTED.
>> Reporter: THEN THERE WAS
AUSCHWITZ SURVIVOR SUSAN
POLLOCK, A HUNGARIAN WHO NOW
LIVES IN LONDON, NERVOUSLY
RETRACING THE FOOTSTEPS OF HER
FAMILY INTO THE VERY GAS CHAMBER
WHERE THEY DIED.
>> MY ENTIRE EXTENDED FAMILY
CAME HERE WITH THEIR MANY
CHILDREN AND I LOST EVERY ONE,
MORE THAN 50 MEMBERS OF MY
FAMILY WERE MURDERED.
>> Reporter: LIKE MANY, SUSAN
WAS BACK HERE FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN 70 YEARS.
TONIGHT, THOSE YEARS SEEMED TO
ROLL AWAY AS A GROUP OF
SURVIVORS WALKED WHERE THEY'D
WALKED ONCE BEFORE.
ALONG THE RAILWAY LINE THROUGH
THE SNOW TO PLACE CANDLES ON A
MONUMENT TO MORE THAN A MILLION
MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN WHO HAD
MADE THE SAME WALK AND NEVER
RETURNED.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENTS OF
FRANCE, GERMANY AND AUSTRIA
ATTENDED THE CEREMONIES, AND
VOWED TO FIGHT ANTI-SEMITISM AND
EXTREMISM ACROSS EUROPE.
>> Woodruff: THE INDONESIAN
MILITARY CALLED OFF ITS SEARCH
TODAY FOR THE VICTIMS OF AIR
ASIA FLIGHT 8501.
OFFICIALS SAID THE FUSELAGE
PROVED TOO HARD TO RAISE FROM
THE JAVA SEA, IN STRONG CURRENTS
AND POOR VISIBILITY.
REAR ADMIRAL WIDODO, WHO GOES BY
A SINGLE NAME, LIKE MANY
INDONESIANS, SAID HE WAS CALLING
BACK THREE WARSHIPS AND TWO
HELICOPTERS.
>> ( translated ): WE APOLOGIZE
TO THE FAMILIES OF THE VICTIMS.
WE'VE BEEN TRYING OUR BEST TO
FIND THE BODIES.
FOR THE PAST TWO DAYS OUR DIVERS
HAVE GONE DOWN AND COULDN'T FIND
ANY BODIES.
WHETHER WE PULL UP THE FUSELAGE
OR NOT DOESN'T AFFECT THE
ONGOING INVESTIGATION BECAUSE IT
IS EMPTY, ACCORDING TO OUR
DIVERS.
>> Woodruff: 70 BODIES HAVE BEEN
RECOVERED SO FAR, BUT 92 VICTIMS
ARE STILL MISSING.
A CIVILIAN AGENCY WILL CONTINUE
THE SEARCH FOR THEM.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, SENATE DEMOCRATS AGREED
TO STOP A MOVE TO IMPOSE NEW
SANCTIONS ON IRAN, OVER ITS
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
THEY SAID THEY'D GIVE THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION NEGOTIATIONS WITH
IRAN ANOTHER TWO MONTHS TO
PRODUCE A FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT.
MOST REPUBLICANS BACK THE BILL,
BUT THEY'D NEED DEMOCRATIC VOTES
TO OVERRIDE A THREATENED
PRESIDENTIAL VETO.
32A
AND HOUSE REPUBLICANS SAID
THEY'RE UNIMPRESSED WITH NEW
NUMBERS THAT SHOW THE LOWEST
DEFICIT YET UNDER PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
PROJECTED RED INK TOTALING $468
BILLION DOLLARS THIS FISCAL
YEAR.
AT A HEARING TODAY, REPUBLICANS
POINTED OUT THAT DEFICITS WILL
START RISING AGAIN IN 2017.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
EXPANDING OFFSHORE DRILLING IN
THE ATLANTIC;
NORTH DAKOTA BUSINESSES
CAUTIOUSLY WAIT FOR OIL PRICES
TO RISE AGAIN;
EUROPEAN STRATEGIES TO COMBAT
EXTREMISM AT HOME;
SAUDI ARABIA'S MIXED RECORD ON
HUMAN RIGHTS;
AND, DOCUMENTING WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN A LANGUAGE DISAPPEARS.
>> Woodruff: LESS THAN 48 HOURS
AFTER THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED A
PROPOSAL TO BLOCK ENERGY
DEVELOPMENT IN ALASKA'S ARCTIC
REFUGE, HIS ADMINISTRATION SAID
TODAY IT PLANS TO OPEN UP PARTS
OF THE ATLANTIC COAST FOR OIL
AND GAS EXPLORATION.
THE PROPOSAL WOULD ALLOW
OFFSHORE DRILLING ALONG THE
SOUTHEASTERN ATLANTIC COAST FOR
THE FIRST TIME, FROM VIRGINIA
DOWN TO GEORGIA.
COMPANIES COULD WIN LEASES FOR
DRILLING, BUT WOULD HAVE TO KEEP
A 50-MILE BUFFER FROM COASTAL
AREAS IN CASE OF A SPILL.
THE PLAN WOULD, HOWEVER, BLOCK
EXPLORATION IN SOME WATERS OFF
ALASKA'S NORTH SLOPE.
WE TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT WHAT
THIS WOULD MEAN, AND THE
REACTION TO THIS SERIES OF
MOVES, WITH AMY HARDER, WHO
REPORTS FOR THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME ON.
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THE
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCING THIS
RIGHT NOW, 48 HOURS, AS WE SAID,
AFTER THE OTHER ANNOUNCEMENT?
>> Reporter: IT'S CERTAINLY
NOT A COINCIDENCE.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS, SINCE
PRESIDENT OBAMA BECAME
PRESIDENT, HAS REALLY DE AON GOT
OF GIVE-AND-TAKE WITH THIS
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT POLICY.
SO THEY CAME OUT ON SUNDAY
ANNOUNCING THEY'RE GOING TO PUT
AWAY ABOUT 13 MILLION ACRES OF
THE ARTIC NATIONAL WILDLIFE
REFUGE AS WILDERNESS, WHICH
REALLY PUTS IT OFF TO OIL AND
GAS DEVELOPMENT.
OF COURSE, THIS PLAN OT OFU THE
INTERIOR DEPARTMENT IS REQUIRED
BY LAW, BUT THEY WANTED TO SHOW
THE ENVIRONMENTAL BASE AND SOME
CONGRESSIONAL DEMOCRATS THAT
THEY'RE COMMITTED TO PROTECTING
SOME OF THESE LANDS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THEY'RE
CLEARLY GIVING SOME SUPPORT TO
THE INDUSTRY BY OPENING UP
CAUTIOUSLY SOME OF THESE AREAS.
>> Woodruff: AND HOW TROLL IS
THIS ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO ALLOW OIL AND GAS
DRILLING, OR TENTATIVELY WILL
ALLOW BETWEEN VIRGINIA AND
GEORGIA.
>> AND I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SAY "TENTATIVELY."
SECRETARY JEWEL OF THE INTERIOR
DEPARTMENT STRESSED THIS IS THE
BROADEST PLAN THEY'RE GOING TO
CONSIDER.
WHEN IT GOES TIME IN THE NEXT
COUPLE OF YEARS, THEY MAY
WHITTLE IT DOWN TO SOMETHING
SMALLER THAN MAWHATTHEY PROPOSED
TODAY.
BUT THE MOVE TO EVEN CONSIDER
DRILLING OFF THE ATLANTIC COAST
IS SIGNIFICANT.
THERE'S NO DRILLING THERE NOW.
THERE'S BEEN VERY LITTLE EVER IN
THE-OF THAT REGION TO HAVE
DRILLING THERE.
>> Woodruff: BUT IS THERE
CONSISTENCY HERE?
I MEAN, ON THE ONE HAND, THEY'RE
SAYING YOU CAN'T DRILL-- MAINLY
OFF THE NORTH SLOPE OF ALASKA
ALONG THAT VERY FRAGILE COASTAL
AREA, BUT YOU CAN DRILL ALONG
THE EASTERN SEABOARD OF THE
UNITED STATES, OFF THE COAST.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
>> I THINK ONE BIG DIFFERENCE
WITH THE ATLANTIC COAST IS A LOT
OF THOSE GOVERNORS AND LAWMAKERS
ARE VIRGINIA DOWN TO GEORGIA
ACTUALLY SUPPORT THE PROSPECT OF
OFFSHORE DRILLING BECAUSE THEY
HOPE TO RECEIPT ECONOMIC
BENEFITS FROM THAT.
SO THAT'S ONE REASON THAT
SECRETARY JEWEL CITED AS THE
PURPOSE OF OPENING UP AT LEAST
ONE LEASE SALE IN THAT REGION.
I THINK IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO
NOTE THAT THE DEMOCRATS
REPRESENTING THE STATES NORTH OF
VIRGINIA ARE NOT HAPPY ABOUT
THIS.
THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT SPILLS.
AND SO I THINK YOU'RE GOING TO
SEE A BIG CONGRESSIONAL
PUSH-BACK ON THAT FRONT AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: BUT IS THE
ARGUMENT THE MANAGER MAKING, ONE
OF THEM, THAT THIS REGION ALONG
THE MID-ATLANTIC IS NOT AS
FRAGILE AS WHAT'S IN ALASKA?
>> I THINK WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID IS THE
CONDITIONS IN THE ARCTIC ARE
VERY UNIQUE, ESPECIALLY COMPARED
TO THE GULF OF MEXICO WHERE MOST
OF THE OFFSHORE OIL IS DONE IN
THE ATLANTIC.
THEWEA THER IS VERY COLD, VERY
ICY.
THE SEASON FOR DRILLING AT ALL
IS A SMALL WINDOW, GIVEN THE
COLD WEATHER.
BUT I THINK THAT'S A POINT THAT
CONGRESSIONAL DEMOCRATS MAKE
WHEN THEY DON'T WANT THE
DRILLING OFF OF THE ATLANTIC
COAST.
I THINK THAT THE ADMINISTRATION
ACTUALLY DID PROP PROPOSED A LEE
IN 2010 BUT RETREATED ON THAT IN
THE WAKE OF THE OIL SPILL THAT
OCCURRED JUST A COUPLE OF
MONTHS, IRONICALLY, AFTER THAT
ANNOUNCEMENT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT HAS CHANGED
SINCE THEN?
THEY WERE WILLING TO DO IT IN
2010 AS YOU POINT OUT.
THEY PULLED BACK AFTER THE BIG
SPILL IN THE GULF.
WHAT HAPPENED?
>> CONGRESS NEVER PASSED A LAW
REQUIRING TOUGHER STANDARDSs
IN OFFSHORE DRILLING BECAUSE OF
THE TYPICAL GRIDLOCK, BUT THE
ADMINISTRATION SAID IT HAS DONE
A LOT TO BEEF UP THE OWN
REGULATIONS WHAT IT CAN DO
WITHOUT CONGRESS.
THERE ARE TWO PENDING
REGULATIONS COMING DOWN THE PIKE
THAT THEY WILL ALSO CITE AS TO
WHY THE SAFETY STANDARDS ARE UP
TO PAR.
ONE IS REQUIRE TOUGHER STANDARDS
ON BLOW-OUT PREVENTERS, A TYPE
OF EQUIPMENT BLAMED FOR THE B.P.
DISASTER, AND SECOND THE
REGULATIONS COMING TO REQUIRE
SPECIAL STANDARDS IN ARCTIC
DRILLING.
>> Woodruff: AMY HARDER,
FINALLY, HOW LIKELY IS THIS
PROPOSAL AS WE'RE LOOKING TAT
NOW TO BECOME A REALITY, TO
BECOME REGULATIONS THAT ARE
GOCHING WHAT COMPANIES CAN DO?
>> RIGHT, THE ANSWER TO THAT
QUESTION WILL COME IN TWO YEARS
OR SOY.
AND EVEN IF THERE WAS DRILLING
OFF THE ATLANTIC COAST,
EXECUTIVES SAY THAT WOULDN'T
HAPPEN UNTIL 2030.
SO I THINK THE PLAN CAN ONLY GET
NARROWER, AND GIVEN THE
PRESIDENT'S COMMITMENT TO
CLIMATE CHANGE, I WOULDN'T BE
SURPRISED IF THEY ULTIMATELY
TOOK IT OUT OF THE FINAL PLAN.
SOY AT THIS POINT, IT'S TOO
EARLY TO SAY.
>> Woodruff: AMY HARDER WITH
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL," WE
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: THE PUSH FOR MORE
OIL AND GAS COMES IN THE WAKE OF
A RECORD BOOM IN DOMESTIC
PRODUCTION AND AFTER AN
UNEXPECTEDLY STEEP PLUNGE IN THE
PRICE OF CRUDE OIL IN RECENT
MONTHS.
ONE OF THE STATES WHERE THE BOOM
HAS BEEN MOST PRONOUNCED, OF
COURSE, IS NORTH DAKOTA.
BUT AS OIL'S PRICE KEEPS
DROPPING, THINGS ARE STARTING TO
CHANGE THERE FOR MANY OILFIELD
BUSINESSES BRACING FOR THE
SLOWDOWN.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM EMILY
GUERIN OF INSIDE ENERGY.
THAT'S A PUBLIC MEDIA
COLLABORATION ON ENERGY ISSUES,
WORKING WITH THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: DRIVE AROUND
WESTERN NORTH DAKOTA AND YOU'LL
SEE A LOT OF THESE.
DRILLING RIGS.
THERE'S OVER 150 OF THEM IN THE
STATE.
ALL DRILLING NEW OIL WELLS INTO
NORTH DAKOTA'S BAKKEN SHALE.
SIX MONTHS AGO, THERE WERE A LOT
MORE.
OIL PRICES HAVE DROPPED SINCE
THEN, SO COMPAES ANIRE CUTTING
BACK ON EXPENSES.
THAT MEANS DRILLING FEWER WELLS.
NORTH DAKOTA IS ALREADY AN
EXPENSIVE PLACE TO DRILL FOR
OIL.
TRANSPORTATION COSTS ARE HIGHER
HERE THAN IN PLACES CLOSER TO
GULF COAST REFINERIES, $10 PER
BARREL OR MORE.
SO THE DROP IN PRICES MAKES
THINGS EVEN HARDER FOR COMPANIES
DRILLING IN THE BAKKEN.
WITH OIL PRICES IN FREE-FALL,
COMPANIES LIKE EMERALD OIL ARE
SUDDENLY CAUTIOUS.
IT'S A SMALL COMPANY BASED IN
DENVER WITH JUST 50 WELLS, NOT
MUCH BY OILFIELD STANDARDS.
CEO MCANDREW RUDISILL SAYS HE'S
DRILLING FEWER WELLS NEXT YEAR.
>> NO ONE WANTS TO LOSE MONEY
DRILLING AN OIL WELL.
SO EVERYONE IS GOING TO PULL
BACK BECAUSE OF WHERE OIL PRICES
ARE RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: NILES HUSHKA IS THE
CEO OF A LARGE ENGINEERING FIRM
BASED IN BISMARCK, NORTH DAKOTA.
HE SAYS COMPANIES OF ALL SIZES
ARE STARTING TO FEEL THE
SLOWDOWN.
>> ALMOST ON A WEEKLY BASIS
THERE'S SOME NEW ANNOUNCEMENT OF
COMPANIES CUTTING BACK ON THE
NUMBER OF RIGS THAT THEY HAVE OR
POSSIBLY RE-DEPLOYING THOSE RIGS
INTO MORE HIGHLY PRODUCTIVE
ZONES.
>> Reporter: HE'S SEEN PLENTY OF
BOOMS AND BUSTS BEFORE IN HIS 30
PLUS YEARS AS AN ENGINEER.
BUT HE SAYS THIS ONE IS HARDER
TO PREDICT.
>> THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT
THIS PARTICULAR COST CYCLE IS
IT'S NOT SUPPLY OR DEMAND
DRIVEN.
IN THAT THE ENTIRE PRICE OF OIL
TODAY IS BEING POLITICALLY
INFLUENCED.
AND THEREFORE YOU CAN'T LOOK AT
A TRADITIONAL ECONOMIC MODEL AND
SAY SUPPLY EQUALS DEMAND AND
THEREFORE PRICES SHOULD GO UP OR
DOWN.
WHAT HE MEANS IS: NORTH AMERICAN
OIL PRODUCERS ARE PUMPING SO
MUCH OIL OUT OF THE GROUND,
THERE'S A GLUT.
AND OPEC, THE ORGANIZATION OF
PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES,
ISN'T CUTTING BACK ON THEIR
PRODUCTION.
SO PRICES ARE PLUMMETING.
HERE IN NORTH DAKOTA, OIL
TOUCHES EVERYTHING.
SO PEOPLE ARE NERVOUS.
FALLING OIL PRICES COULD HAVE A
HUGE IMPACT.
THE SLOWDOWN ISN'T JUST
AFFECTING OIL COMPANIES.
IT'S HITTING THEIR CONTRACTORS
AND SUPPLIERS TOO.
SMALL OILFIELD BUSINESSES LIKE
INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT SALES AND
SERVICE IN WILLISTON, NORTH
DAKOTA ARE BRACING FOR THAT
IMPACT.
THEY MAKE AND FIX PARTS FOR OIL
FIELD EQUIPMENT.
RORY ANDERSON IS ONE OF THE
COMPANY'S OWNERS.
THEY'VE GOT ABOUT 50 EMPLOYEES
AND THEY'RE TRYING TO AVOID
LAYING ANYONE OFF.
SO THEY CUT BACK HOURS, AND LET
THEIR CLEANING CREW GO.
THEY ALSO GIVE ADVICE TO YOUNGER
EMPLOYEES WHO HAVEN'T BEEN
THROUGH A BOOM AND BUST BEFORE.
>> WE TELL THEM, YOU NEED TO
SAVE AS MUCH MONEY AS YOU CAN.
PUT IT AWAY.
DON'T BUY NEW THINGS.
JUST BE PREPARED 'CAUSE IT'S
GOING TO TIGHTEN UP A LONG WAYS.
>> Reporter: ONE WAY COMPANIES
PREPARE FOR A SLOWDOWN IS BY
DIVERSIFYING, NOT RELYING JUST
ON THE OILFIELD FOR ALL THEIR
BUSINESS.
THAT'S WHAT BOB AYALA IS TRYING
TO DO.
HE'S THE OWNER OF SHALE OILFIELD
SERVICES.
HE LEASES A FEW TRUCKS MOUNTED
WITH POWERFUL HOSES AND VACUUMS.
HIS COMPANY GETS CALLED TO CLEAN
UP OIL AND WASTEWATER SPILLS AND
BLAST HOLES INTO THE GROUND FOR
NEW PIPELINES.
BUT THAT'S NOT ALL THEY CAN DO.
>> FOR THE SPECIFIC SERVICES WE
OFFER, IT IS TIED TO THE OIL
BOOM.
BECAUSE EVERYTHING IS HERE.
BUT WE DO A LOT OF UTILITY WORK.
WE EXPOSE FIBER OPTICS.
WE DO OTHER WORK BESIDES JUST
DRILLING RIGS AND THOSE TYPE OF
OIL BOOM SERVICES.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS DEMAND FOR
HIS BUSINESS IS PRETTY CONSTANT.
BECAUSE EVEN IF DRILLING SLOWS
DOWN, THERE WILL ALWAYS BE
SPILLS.
>> GOING FORWARD, EVEN WHEN THE
OIL BOOM SLOWS, THERE ARE STILL
SO MANY WELLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
THAT HAVE TO BE MAINTAINED,
THERE ARE STILL ON-GOING FLUID
THAT'S BEING MOVED.
THERE STILL HAS TO BE SUPPORT
SERVICES, AND WE'RE ONE OF THEM.
>> Reporter: AND FOR SOME OTHER
BUSINESSES, DEMAND IS STILL
HIGH.
TAKE THIS INDOOR RV PARK.
INSIDE THE OVERSIZED STORAGE
UNITS IT'S WARM AND QUIET.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
YOUR SEWER AND WATER PIPES
FREEZING.
OWNER LOUIS BONNEVILLE SAYS IT'S
AN OBVIOUS CHOICE FOR THE HARSH
NORTH DAKOTA CLIMATE.
>> WE DO HAVE A WAITING LIST FOR
OUR INDOOR UNITS AND WE HAVE A
FEW OPENINGS OUTSIDE RIGHT NOW.
BUT EVERY DAY WE GET THREE OR
FOUR CALLS FOR SOMEBODY TO GO
INSIDE.
AND MOST OF THE TIME IT'S
BECAUSE THEY'RE FROZE UP FROM
ANOTHER RV PARK AND THEY'D LIKE
TO MOVE IN.
>> Reporter: A FEW PEOPLE HAVE
MOVED OUT RECENTLY, BUT
BONNEVILLE SAYS THAT ALWAYS
HAPPENS THIS TIME OF YEAR.
>> I BELIEVE PEOPLE ARE LEAVING
BECAUSE OF THE WEATHER, NOT
BECAUSE OF THE PRICE OF OIL.
IF IT WAS THE PRICE OF OIL, WE'D
HAVE A MASS EXIT.
WE'D HAVE COMPANIES THAT ARE
HERE WITH TEN PEOPLE, AND ALL OF
A SUDDEN WE'D HAVE TEN PEOPLE
ALL LEAVE AND GO HOME.
AND WE HAVEN'T SEEN THAT YET.
SO I DON'T THINK THE OIL PRICE
IS DICTATING OUR MOVE OUT RIGHT
NOW.
WILLISTON, THE TOWN AT THE HEART
OF THE BOOM, USUALLY FEELS
SLOWER THIS TIME OF YEAR.
COLD WEATHER PUTS A LOT OF THE
NEW CONSTRUCTION AND PIPELINE
PROJECTS ON HOLD, SO THERE'S FAR
FEWER HEAVY TRUCKS RUMBLING
THROUGH TOWN THAN IN THE SUMMER.
BUT IT'S REALLY HARD TO TELL
WHAT'S SEASONAL AND WHAT'S DUE
TO LOW OIL PRICES.
SOME SAY THIS IS ACTUALLY A
PRETTY GOOD TIME OF YEAR FOR
PRICES TO DROP.
>> WE'D RATHER NOT BE DRILLING
NOW ANYWAYS, WE'D RATHER BE
SLOWING THINGS DOWN, WE'D RATHER
BE WAITING FOR BETTER WEATHER TO
COME ALONG.
AND IF THERE WAS SUCH A THING AS
A BEST TIME IT WOULD BE RIGHT
NOW IN THE MIDDLE OF THE COLDEST
PART OF WINTER.
>> Reporter: THE FULL EFFECT OF
LOW PRICES PROBABLY WON'T BE
FELT UNTIL SPRING, WHEN THE
PRAIRIE THAWS, TEMPERATURES RISE
AND ACTIVITY WOULD NORMALLY
START BACK UP.
UNTIL THEN, A LOT OF PEOPLE UP
HERE ARE IN A KIND OF
HIBERNATION.
WAITING TO SEE WHAT HAPPENS.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M EMILY
GUERIN IN WILLISTON, NORTH
DAKOTA.
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN AGAIN TO
ISLAMIC EXTREMISM IN THE UNITED
KINGDOM.
LAST NIGHT, CHIEF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT MARGARET
WARNER REPORTED FROM LONDON
ABOUT WHAT'S DRIVING SO MANY
BRITISH, AND EUROPEAN MUSLIMS TO
TRAVEL TO SYRIA TO FIGHT WITH
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
TONIGHT SHE REPORTS ON WHAT THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY
LEADERS ARE TRYING TO DO TO STOP
THAT TREND.
>> Reporter: IMRAN KHAWAJA WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE A DEAD MAN, THE
LONDONER WENT TO SYRIA LAST
JANUARY TO JOIN A RADICAL GROUP
AFFILIATED WITH ISLAMIC STATE.
HE WAS A STAR OF ITS ONLINE
RECRUITMENT VIDEOS, USUALLY
MASKED, BRANDISHING WEAPONS.
THEN LAST JUNE, THE GROUP
ANNOUNCED ON SOCIAL MEDIA THAT
HE'D BEEN KILLED IN BATTLE.
BUT IT WAS ALL A RUSE, THAT SAME
DAY THE 27-YEAR OLD WAS ARRESTED
TRYING TO SNEAK BACK THROUGH THE
BRITISH PORT OF DOVER.
LAST WEEK, HE PLED GUILTY TO
FOUR TERRORISM-RELATED CRIMES,
WHICH COULD CARRY LIFE IN
PRISON.
JUST DAYS AGO, SCOTLAND YARD
ANNOUNCED IT HAD MADE 165 SYRIA-
RELATED TERRORIST ARRESTS IN
2014, INCLUDING KHAWAJA'S, A SIX
FOLD INCREASE OVER THE 25
ARRESTED IN 2013.
>> IT'S THE SURGE OF WORK OVER
THE LAST YEAR IS STRETCHING US.
>> Reporter: BRITAIN'S COUNTER-
TERRORISM CHIEF MARK ROWLEY,
SAYS NOT EVEN THE UK'S 40 YEARS
OF DEALING WITH IRISH
REPUBLICAN-INSPIRED TERRORISM
PREPARED THEM FOR THE SCOPE OF
THE NEW THREAT FROM ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS GOING TO, AND
RETURNING FROM, SYRIA AND IRAQ.
>> HALF OF THE PEOPLE WHO WE ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT WHO TRAVELED TO
SYRIA WEREN'T PREVIOUSLY ON OUR
RADAR, SO NEW PEOPLE BEING DRAWN
INTO THIS.
THIS ISN'T THE USUAL SUSPECTS,
TO USE AN OLD PHRASE, SOME OF
THIS IS NEW PEOPLE COMING INTO
THE TERRORIST CAUSE.
>> Reporter: TO DATE,
AUTHORITIES ESTIMATE 600 UK
MUSLIMS HAVE GONE TO JOIN JIHADI
GROUPS IN SYRIA, AND NEARLY HALF
MAY HAVE RETURNED.
NONE OF THESE RETURNEES HAS
PULLED OFF AN ATTACK IN THE UK,
BUT AUTHORITIES SAY THEY FOILED
FIVE MAJOR PLOTS LAST YEAR THAT
WOULD HAVE LOST MANY LIVES.
THIS MONTH'S ATTACKS IN PARIS
ALSO HIGHLIGHTED THE THREAT
POSED THROUGHOUT WESTERN EUROPE
BY UNDER-THE-RADAR JIHADIS
TRAINED ABROAD.
ROWLEY SAID AUTHORITIES ARE
TRYING TO STEM THE SURGE OF
THESE FIGHTERS AT EVERY POINT IN
THE PIPELINE, DEPENDING ON TIPS
FROM THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY, WHICH
HAVE SURGED IN THE PAST YEAR.
>> YOU SCUM SHOULD ROT IN HELL,
MUSLIM.
>> Reporter: MOHAMMED KOZBAR ,
CHAIRMAN OF THE FINSBURY PARK
MOSQUE, WHO IS TRYING TO HELP,
READ US ANONYMOUS HATE MAIL
RECEIVED AFTER PARIS.
HIS LONDON MOSQUE WAS ONCE A
HOTBED OF EXTREMIST PREACHING,
UNDER IMAM ABU HAMZA AL MASRI,
CONVICTED IN NEW YORK THIS MONTH
FOR INSTIGATING TERRORIST
ATTACKS.
SHOE BOMBER" RICHARD REID WAS
AMONG THE RADICALS WHO PRAYED
THERE.
IN 2005,  KOZBAR AND OTHERS
WRESTED CONTROL OF THE MOSQUE
AWAY FROM ITS RADICAL LEADERS.
NOW, HE SAYS, THEY WORK WITH
MEMBERS, STARTING AT THE
YOUNGEST AGE, WARNING ABOUT THE
DANGERS OF EXTREMISM.
>> WE LOOK TO PEOPLE WHO ARE
VULNERABLE, ESPECIALLY YOUNG
PEOPLE, WHO MIGHT BE IN A WAY
DRIVEN AWAY FROM THE MOSQUE TO
EXTREMISM SO WE TRY TO ENGAGE
WITH THESE PEOPLE IN ADVANCE
>> Reporter: THAT'S THE IDEA
BEHIND THE ACTIVE CHANGE
FOUNDATION, IN EAST LONDON'S
LEYTON NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S THE BRAINCHILD OF HANIF
QADIR, WHO WENT TO AFHANISTAN TO
FIGHT AGAINST THE U.S. AFTER
9/11, BUT LEFT WHEN HE SAW
CRUELTY BEING COMMITTED BY BOTH
SIDES.
>> I GOT CAUGHT UP UP IN A
NETWORK OF INDIVIDUALS,
AFTERWARDS KNOWN TO BE FROM AL
QAEDA.
IT'S A CLASSIC CASE OF BEING
RECRUITED INTO A NETWORK AND
BEING RADICALIZED.
>> Reporter: QADIR RETURNED TO
LONDON ON A MISSION TO PREVENT
VIOLENT EXTREMISM AMONG ITS
MUSLIMS.
AT FIRST HIS MESSAGE FELL ON
DEAF EARS.
>> NOBODY WAS APPRECIATING THE
FACT, YOU KNOW, WE'VE GOT
PROBLEMS IN OUR COMMUNITY.
THEN WE HAD AT THAT POINT IF WAS
LIKE 'WE TOLD YOU SO', BUT NOW
WE HOPE THAT YOU CAN UNDERSTAND
AND HELP US TO GET ON WITH THE
WORK THAT NEEDS TO BE DONE.
>> Reporter: THE LONDON
TRANSPORT SUICIDE BOMBINGS OF
JULY 2005, WHICH KILLED  MORE
THAN 50 CIVILIANS, WERE THE WORK
OF FOUR BRITISH-BORN YOUNG
MUSLIMS.
THE ATTACKS SPARKED NEW LAWS AND
PROGRAMS TO COMBAT EXTREMIST
TERRORISM.
18-YEAR-OLD JAVID KHAN, WHO
MOVED TO LONDON FROM AFGHANISTAN
WITH HIS FAMILY IN 2010, SAID
QADIR'S PROGRAM  HELPED HIM AS A
TEENAGER RESIST RADICALIZING
INFLUENCES.
>> THIS IS THE ONLY PLACE YOU
CAN FIND OUT ABOUT WHAT'S GOING
ON IN THE WORLD AND HOW WE CAN
AVOID THE RECRUITERS OF ISIS AND
OTHER EXTREMIST GROUPS.
I DON'T WANT THAT NAME ON ME OR
ON MY FAMILY.
>> THIS IS A HIGHLY-POPULATED
AREA FULL OF MUSLIMS SO THERE
WAS A HIGH CHANCE OF ME MEETING
THE WRONG TYPE OF PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: 22-YEAR OLD
UNIVERSITY STUDENT HAMZA
ABDULWAHI, WHO MOVED TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AT 13, SAYS THE
PROGRAM HELPED HIM UNDERSTAND
THAT THE WAY OF ALLAH DOES NOT
INCLUDE VIOLENCE.
>> IF THE PERSON WENT THERE TO
FIGHT YOU HAVE TO BE CONCERNED
BECAUSE CLEARLY HE'S NOT OF THE
RIGHT MIND, IF HE WENT FOR OTHER
MOTIVES TO GO KILL PEOPLE, AND
THAT PERSON COMES BACK HE COULD
CLEARLY DO THE SAME THING HERE.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE IS A
FIERCE DEBATE HERE ABOUT THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF THESE PROGRAMS,
WHETHER IT'S INTERVENG BEINFORE
SOMEONE GOES TO FIGHT, OR TRYING
TO REHABILITATE THEM AFTERWARDS,
CONCEDES THE MINISTER IN CHARGE
FOR THE UK "HOME OFFICE", JAMES
BROKENSHIRE.
BRITAIN DOES HAVE ONE OF THE
HIGHEST PERCENTAGES OF MUSLIMS
YOUTH GOING TO FIGHT.
WHAT IS YOUR EVIDENCE THAT YOUR
PROGRAMS ARE SUCCESSFUL?
>> WE'VE HAD AROUND 2,000
REFERRALS AND SEVERAL HUNDRED
PEOPLE ARE RECEIVING DIRECT
SUPPORT IN OTHER WORDS TO
CHALLENGE THE IDEOLOGY.
BUT I THINK THERE'S NO ONE SIZE
FITS ALL.
SO, IT IS A COMPLEX PICTURE, ONE
THAT WE ARE VIGILANT AND
CONSTANTLY CHALLENGING OURSELVES
AS TO WHAT MORE WE CAN DO.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE IS
CRITICISM FROM THE MUSLIM
COMMUNITY THAT THESE PROGRAMS
TARGET ONLY MUSLIMS.
>> BASIC PROGRAMS LIKE "PREVENT"
FOR EXAMPLE, PREVENTING VIOLENT
EXTREMISM AS IT WAS CALLED IN
THE BEGINNING, WANTED
COMMUNITIES TO LITERALLY SPY ON
ONE ANOTHER.
>> Reporter: MOAZZEM BEGG,
DETAINED AT GUANTANAMO FOR
NEARLY THREE YEARS ON CHARGES OF
ATTENDING AL QAEDA TRAINING
CAMPS IN AFGHANISTAN, RETURNED
TO LONDON IN 2005 TO FOUND THE
GROUP "CAGE."
IT OPPOSES WHAT IT SEES AS
DRACONIAN ANTI-TERRORISM
MEASURES.
LAST YEAR HE WAS ARRESTED FOR
GOING TO SYRIA IN 2012 TO TRAIN
REBELS FIGHTING PRESIDENT BASHAR
ASSAD'S FORCES.
WESTERN GOVERNMENTS WERE
SUPPORTING SOME ANTI-ASSAD
FIGHTERS THEN TOO.
THE CHARGES WERE LATER DROPPED.
SO WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THEY COME
HOME?
>> I WAS IN PRISON WITH MANY OF
THESE YOUNG MEN WHO HAVE
RETURNED.
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW WHETHER
THEY'VE COMMITTED A CRIME OR
NOT.
THEY WENT FOR BENIGN REASONS,
THEY THOUGHT THEY WERE HELPING
THE SYRIANS AND THEY FOUND OUT
SOMETHING ELSE IS GOING ON.
>> Reporter: BUT COUNTER-
TERRORISM CHIEF ROWLEY IS
SKEPTICAL OF SUCH CLAIMS.
>> SOME OF IT SOUNDS A BIT
INCREDIBLE TO ME, "MY SON'S BEEN
OUT THERE, HE REGRETS WHAT HE'S
DONE, HE WANTS TO COME BACK,
HE'S SORRY."
IF SOMEONE HAS TRAVELED AND NOT
GOT INVOLVED WITH ANYTHING, THEN
WE CAN HELP THEM.
BUT PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING OUT
THERE, THEY ARE PLANNING TO JOIN
A TERRORIST GROUP.
YOU CAN'T POSSIBLY NOT REALIZE
HOW AWFUL THE ACTIVITIES OUT
THERE BY ISIS ARE ALL REGARDED,
IF YOU ARE GOING TO TAKE PART IN
THAT THEN WE ARE GOING TO
INVESTIGATE YOU AND WE'RE GOING
TO THROW THE BOOK AT YOU.
>> Reporter: BRITAIN IS LOOKING
TO ADD PAGES TO THAT BOOK, A
CONTROVERSIAL NEW ANTI-TERROR
BILL IS WORKING ITS WAY THROUGH
PARLIAMENT, CRITICS DUB IT "THE
SNOOPERS' BILL."
IT WOULD INCREASE GOVERNMENT'S
POWERS TO MONITOR SUSPECTED
EXTREMISTS AND EXPAND THE
UNIVERSE OF PEOPLE ASKED TO
REPORT SUSPECTED CASES TO
AUTHORITIES.
ALL THIS, SAYS FINSBURY PARK'
MOSQUE CHAIRMAN KOZBAR, WILL PUT
BRITISH MUSLIMS EVEN MORE IN THE
CROSSHAIRS.
>> TO TELL THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY
THAT YOU HAVE TO SPY ON YOUR
CHILDREN AND THE SCHOOLS TO SPY
ON THE CHILDREN, TO TELL THEM
WHEN YOU SEE SOMETHING WRONG OR
YOU THINK THAT THERE IS
SOMETHING WRONG YOU HAVE TO
REPORT AND ALL OF THIS, THIS IS
NOT HELPFUL.
WE WANT AS BRITISH PEOPLE TO BE
SAFE AND SECURE, BUT WE WANT TO
DO IT THE RIGHT WAY.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, THOUGH,
THE "RIGHT WAY" TO COUNTER THE
THREAT, REMAINS IN DISPUTE.
I'M MARGARET WARNER IN LONDON,
FOR THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE DEATH OF A
MONARCH HIGHLIGHTS THE
COMPLICATED RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TWO STRONG ALLIES.
BUT BEHIND PRAISE FROM THE U.S.
LIE SERIOUS QUESTIONS ABOUT
SAUDIRABI AA'S HUMAN RIGHTS
RECORD.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT
STEPPED OFF AIR FORCE ONE,
ON A MISSION TO PAY RESPECTS TO
THE LATE KING ABDULLAH, WHO DIED
THURSDAY AT THE AGE OF 90.
AND TO MEET WITH THE NEW SAUDI
KING, SALMAN BIN ABDUL-AZIZ.
DISCUSSED THE "ISLAMIC STATE"
THREAT; THE CHAOS IN YEMEN; JUST
TO THE SAUDIS' SOUTH; AND THE
ONGOING DISPUTE OVER IRAN'S
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
AT THE SAME TIME, PRESIDENT
OBAMA WALKED A FINE LINE ON THE
ISSUE OTHE F SAUDI HUMAN RIGHTS
RECORD.
AN AIDE SAID HE DID NOT ASK KING
SALMAN ABOUT A SAUDI BLOGGER
SENTENCED TO 1,000 LASHES FOR
INSULTING ISLAM.
INSTEAD, THE PRESIDENT ARGUED IN
GENERAL FOR TOLERANCE AND FREE
SPEECH.
AS HE TOLD CNN'S FAREED ZAKARIA
BEFORE ARRIVING IN RIYADH:
>> WHAT I'VE FOUND EFFECTIVE IS
TO APPLY STEADY, CONSISTENT
PRESSURE, EVEN AS WE ARE GETTING
BUSINESS DONE THAT NEEDS TO GET
DONE, AND OFTEN TIMES THAT MAKES
SOME OF OUR ALLIES
UNCOMFORTABLE.
IT MAKES THEM FRUSTRATED,
SOMETIMES WE HAVE TO BALANCE OUR
NEED TO SPEAK TO THEM ABOUT
HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUES WITH
IMMEDIATE CONCERNS THAT WE HAVE
IN TERMS OF COUNTERING TERRORISM
OR DEALING WITH REGIONAL
STABILITY.
>> Reporter: THE FULL INTERVIEW
WILL AIR ON "FAREED ZAKARIA
GPS" THIS WEEKEND.
ON THE SAUDI SIDE, THERE ARE
INDICATIONS THAT SALMAN WANTS
STEPPED-UP COOPERATION WITH THE
WEST, ESPECIALLY ON FIGHTING
ISLAMIST EXTREMISM.
AN EARLY SIGN CAME WHEN HE CHOSE
55-YEAR-OLD MOHAMMED BIN NAYEF,
A WESTERN-EDUCATED MINISTER
FOCUSED ON COUNTER-TERRORISM, TO
BE SECOND IN LINE TO THE THRONE.
BUT THE KING AND HIS ADVISORS
FACE A BALANCING ACT BETWEEN
WORKING WITH THE WEST, AND
ACCOMMODATING THE COUNTRY'S
ULTRA-CONSERVATIVE BRAND OF
ISLAM.
RECENT REFORMS HAVE ALLOWED
WOMEN INTO POLITICAL LIFE, BUT
THEY ARE STILL NOT PERMITTED TO
DRIVE CARS.
AND JUST THIS WEEK, THE SAUDIS
CARRIED OUT ANOTHER PUBLIC
BEHEADING, THE FIRST UNDER KING
SALMAN'S RULE.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON WHETHER
IT'S NOTABLE THAT LATER TODAY A
U.S. OFFICIAL SAID THE NEW SAUDI
KING DID NOT RAISE ANY
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON WHETHER
THE U.S. HAS STRUCK THE RIGHT
BALANCE BETWEEN ITS INTERESTS
AND CONCERNS OVER SAUDI ARABIA'S
HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD, I'M JOINED
BY GARY SICK, A VETERAN OF THE
WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL STAFF DURING THE FORD,
CARTER AND REAGAN
ADMINISTRATIONS.
HE'S NOW AT COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
AND TOM PORTEOUS, DEPUTY PROGRAM
DIRECTOR OF THE ADVOCACY GROUP,
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH.
AND WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
PROGRAM.
GARY SICK, TO YOU FIRST, HOW
WOULD YOU ASSESS SAUDI ARABIA'S
HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD COMPARED TO
OTHER COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD
AND IN THE REGION?
>> WELL, IT OFTEN ISN'T A-- IT
ISN'T VERY HELPFUL TO DO A
COMPARISON AND SAYING ONE IS
BETTER THAN THE OTHER IN THIS.
BUT I MUST SAY THAT, YOU KNOW,
SAUDI ARABIA HAS ONE OF THE
WORST RECORDS IN THE REGION FOR
ALL THE REASONS THAT YOU JUST
ENUMERATED, BUT, YOU KNOW,
THEY'VE BEEN CRACKING DOWN HARD
ON THEIR INTERNAL DISSENT.
YOU KNOW, THE POOR FELLOW WHO IS
BEING FLOGGED IN PUBLIC IS
GUILTY OF DOING NOTHING MORE
THAN PRACTICALLY, YOU KNOW,
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
AMERICANS DO ON FAB EVER-- ON
FACEBOOK EVERY DAY.
THE OTHER THING, IS THE SAUDIS
ARE FACING A SERIES OF
CHALLENGES WHICH ACTUALLY WE CAN
COME BACK TO THAT, IF YOU LIKE.
ACTUALLY SOME OF THEM ARE OF
THEIR OWN MAKING AND SOME OF
THOSE HAVE TO DO WITH HUMAN
RIGHTS IN TERMS OF THEIR ABILITY
TO EXPORT THEIR OWN IDEAS AND
THAT THOSE IDEAS IN MANY CASES
ARE COMING BACK TO BITE THEM.
>> Woodruff: AND WE WILL COME
BACK TO THOSE CHALLENGES.
BUT TO YOU, TOM PORTEOUS, HOW DO
YOU SIZE UP SAUDI ARABIA'S HUMAN
RIGHTS RECORD?
>> WELL, I THINK GARY SICK HAS
PUT IT VERY WELL.
IT IS ONE OF THE WORST IN THE
REGION, IF NOT IN THE ENTIRE
WORLD, ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS, FOR
EXAMPLE, THE MALE GUARDIANSHIP
SYSTEM REQUIRES THAT WOMEN GET
PERMISSION FROM THEIR NEAREST
MALE RELATIVE TO DO JUST ABOUT
ANY BUSINESS WITH THE
GOVERNMENT, TO DO JUST ABOUT ANY
KIND OF TRANSACTION IN PUBLIC
LIFE.
THERE'S THE ISSUE OF FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION AND SERIES, WHICH
GARY JUST TOUCHED UPON THERE.
AND THERE'S ACTUALLY BEEN AN
INCREASE SINCE 11 IN THE
CRACKDOWN ON FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION AND ASSOCIATION,
PARTICULARLY DIRECTED AT THOSE
WHO ARE EXPRESSING CONCERN ABOUT
EXTREMISM IN THE KINGDOM.
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION IS
PRACTICALLY MINIMAL.
THERE'S RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION.
MUZZ LUM MINORITY SECTS IN SAUDI
ARABIA, LIKE THE SHIA, ARE
PERSECUTED, AND NON-MUZZ LUM
RELIGIONS, IF YOU BELONG TO A
NON-MUSLUM RELIGION, YOU ARE NOT
ALLOWED TO PRACTICE YOUR
RELIGION AT ALL.
AND THEN THERE'S THE WHOLE ISSUE
OF THE JUSTICE ACCEPT THE BASED
ON A VERY STRICT AND EXTREME
INTERPRETATION OF ISLAMIC LAW.
AND AS BEAR SICK JUST MENTIONED
AS WELL, SAUDI ARABIA'S FOREIGN
POLICY IS-- IS TO SUPPORT
ABUSERS OF HUMAN RIGHTS AROUND
THE REGION.
>> Woodruff: WELL, LET ME ASK
BOTH OF YOU, STARTING WITH YOU,
GARY SICK.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THE FACT
WE'RE TOLD WHAT PRESIDENT OBAMA
DID IN HIS CONVERSATION--
GRANTED, IT WAS A SHORT ONE--
WITH THE NEW KING TODAY WAS TO
RAISE BROADLY THE ISSUE OF HUMAN
RIGHTS BUT NOT TO BRING UP ANY
SPECIFIC INSTANCES, LIKE THIS
BLOGGER.
>> , YOU KNOW, IF IT'S-- I WISH
THEY HAD HAD MORE TIME TO TALK
BECAUSE I THINK THERE ARE A LOT
OF THINGS THAT THEY REALLY
NEEDED TO TALK ABOUT VERY MUCH.
I CAN UNDERSTAND THE PRESIDENT'S
INTEREST IN DEALING WITH THE
ISSUES OF WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT
THE IRANIAN NEGOTIATIONS?
HOW DO WE WORK OUT OUR
DIFFERENCES OVER SYRIA?
WHAT ABOUT OUR DIFFERENCES OF
OPINION WITH REGARD TO EGYPT?
ALL OF THOSE ARE VERY SERIOUS
ISSUES.
BUT, YOU KNOW, I THINK FOR ALL
OF US WHO REALLY CARE ABOUT
THIS, IT REALLY IS IMPORTANT,
ESPECIALLY WITH THE BLOGGER CASE
EYE MEAN, THIS IS SO PUBLIC AND
SO OBVIOUS, AND IT'S SUCH A
COMPLETE TRAVESTY OF JUSTICE,
THAT YOU WISH THAT U.S.
OFFICIALS WOULD IN FACT PUT THAT
HIGHER UP ON THEIR PRIORITY
LIST.
>> Woodruff: TOM PORTEOUS,
SHOULD THE PRESIDENT HAVE MADE
MORE OF A SPECIFIC ISSUE OF THAT
TODAY?
>> YES, OF COURSE, HE SHOULD
HAVE AND PLENTY OF OTHERS ISSUES
HE COULD HAVE RAISED.
THE PRESIDENT SAID IN THAT CLIP
JUST NOW THAT HE FOUND STEADY,
CONSISTENT PRESSURE WAS
EFFECTIVE.
WELL, I MEAN, THERE'S VERY
LITTLE TO SHOW FOR ANY STEADY
CONSISTENT PRESSURE, EVEN IF
THERE HAS BEEN FROM THE UNITED
STATES.
THE FACT IS THE UNITED STATES
HAS NEVER REALLY PUSHED SAUDI
ARABIA, EXCEPT IN A VERY SORT OF
BROADER, RHETORICAL OR COSMETIC
WAY, AND THAT'S MAINLY FOR
COMMERCIAL REASON.
THE STAKES ARE ENORMOUS FOR, YOU
KNOW, VARIOUS SECTORS OF THE
DEFENSE AND SECURITY AND ENERGY
INDUSTRIES IN THE UNITED STATES.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO SECURITY,
IT'S-- YOU KNOW, THE UNITED
STATES REALLY DOES NEED TO ASK
WHETHER ITS CURRENT RELATIONSHIP
WITH SAUDI ARABIA IS WELL
SERVED, WHETHER ITS INTERESTS
ARE WELL SERVED BY ITS CURRENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH SAUDI ARABIA.
>> Woodruff: YOU MEAN DESPITE
THE HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THAT THE HUMAN
RIGHTS RECORD OF THE SECURITY
RECORD ARE-- ARE EXTREMELY
LINKED.
I DON'T THINK THAT YOU CAN
DISASSOCIATE THE TWO, AND I
THINK FOR TWO REASONS, ONE IS--
>> Woodruff: I JUST WANT TO GO
BACK TO GARY SICK AT THIS POINT.
IS IT POSSIBLE FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION TO PUT MORE
PRESSURE TO BRING THIS ISSUE UP
MORE FREQUENTLY AND TO GET
SOMETHING POSITIVE-- TO GET
MOVEMENT IN RETURN?
>> WELL, FIRST TO BE FAIR, IT'S
SIMPLY A FACT THAT WE HAVE VERY,
VERY LIMITED PRESSURE-- LEVERAGE
THAT WE CAN BRING TO BEAR TO
REALLY CHANGE SAUDI BEHAVIOR.
AND THE ONE THING THAT I'M
LOOKING AT THAT I THINK IS
REALLY MOST SIGNIFICANT IS THAT
SAUDI ARABIA IS FACING AN ALMOST
PERFECT STORM OF INTERNATIONAL
PROBLEMS RIGHT NOW WITH THE DROP
IN OIL PRICES, BUT THEIR
RELATIONS WITH BAHRAIN AND WITH
IRAQ, WHICH ARE BAD, THE SYRIAN
THING, WHICH HAS GONE VERY BADLY
FOR THEM.
THE NEED TO KEEP PUMPINGLY MONEY
INTO EGYPT TO KEEP THEM ALIVE,
AND THEN ON THEIR SOUTHERN
BORDER THEY HAVE THE FAILED
STATE COLLAPSE OF YEMEN.
AND THESE ARE MAJOR ISSUES, MANY
OF WHICH ARE ACTUALLY-- AND
ESPECIALLY THE ISIS THREAT WHICH
IS POINTED DIRECTLY AT THEIR
LEGITIMACY AND THEIR HEART.
THAT IS THEIR OWN IDEOLOGY
COMING BACK TO THEM.
AND THEY SIMPLY CANNOT HIDE FROM
THAT.
AND SO THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
FACE THE FACT THAT THEIR OPEN RS
BELIEFS ARE IN FACT BEING
REPACKAGED ABROAD AND BROUGHT
BACK TO STRIKE RIGHT AT THEIR
VERY HEART.
AND THAT'S SOMETHING WHICH I
THINK HAS GOT TO IMPRESS THEM
AND WHICH, IF YOU'RE GOING TO
TRY TO CHANGE THEIR POINT OF
VIEW, THAT'S ONE PLACE WHERE YOU
SHOULD START.
>> Woodruff: TOM PORTEOUS,
DOWNING THERE'S ANY REASON TO
BELIEVE THE SAUDIS WILL PULL
BACK ON SOME OF THESE DRASTIC
HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES THAT THEY'VE
BEEN ACCUSED OF?
>> I THINK THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO IN THE LONG RUN IF THEY'RE
GOING TO SURVIVE.
SAUDI ARABIA FACES A CHOICE
BETWEEN POLITICAL REFORM AND
GREATER RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
OR BEING OVERWHELMED BY THE SORT
OF MILITANCY AND INTOLERANCE AND
EXTREMISM THAT IT HAS LARGELY
HELPED TO CREATE, AS GARY SICK
POINTED OUT.
ANY FROM THE UNITED STATES'
POINT OF VIEW, IT DOES NEED TO
CONVINCE THE SAUDI ARABIANS OF
THAT.
AND, CERTAINLY, I DON'T THINK
THAT AN EFFECTIVE WAY OF
COUNTERING EXTREMISM AND
TERRORISM IN THE REGION IS TO BE
SO CLOSELY ALIGNED WITH AN
AUTHORITARIAN GOVERNMENT WHICH
HAS IN THE PAST AND CONTINUES TO
PROMOTE AN IDEOLOGY OF
SECTARIANISM AND INTOLERANCE IN
THE REGION.
>> Woodruff: WELL, WE DO HEAR
YOU BOTH.
TOM PORTEOUS WITH HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH.
GARY SICK AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY.
GENTLEMEN, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND FINALLY
TONIGHT, TO LANGUAGES AROUND THE
WORLD AT RISK OF BEING LOST.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF A NEW
DOCUMENTARY PREMIERING ON SOME
PBS STATIONS THIS WEEK, AND NOW
STREAMING ONLINE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR LOOK.
>> ARE YOU LTENINGIS TO A SONG
SUNG IN A LANGUAGE CALLED
AMERDAD, A LANGUAGE SPOKEN IN
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA.
THERE IS VIRTUALLY ONLY ONE
PERSON LEFT ON OUR PLANET WHO
SPEAKS THIS LANGUAGE.
HIS NAME IS CHARLIE.
>>> Brown: A LANGUAGE NEARLY
GONE FROM AN ABORIGINAL AREA IN
AUSTRALIA.
WE EXPLORE TONGUES AROUND THE
GLOBE AT RISK OF BEING LOST
FOREVER AND WHAT IS LOST WITH
THEM.
>> WE ARE BEING NARROWED AND
HOMOGENIZED BY THE LOSS OF
LANGUAGES THAT WE'RE NOT EVEN
AWARE OF.
>> Brown: PREDICTIONS ARE
DIRE, THAT BY THE END OF THIS
CENTURY, MORE THAN HALF OF THE
WORLD'S 6,000 LANGUAGES WILL BE
GONE.
>> EVERY LANGUAGE HAS POETRY,
ALTHOUGH IT'S VERY DIFFERENT
FROM CULTURE TO CULTURE, AND AS
I BEGAN TO LEARN ABOUT HOW THESE
LANGUAGES ARE DISAPPEARING, THAT
KIND OF POETRY IS ALSO GOING.
THE ENTIRE INNER LIFE OF A
PEOPLE IS DISAPPEARING WHEN
THEIR LANGUAGE VANISHES.
>> IS THAT YOUR LANGUAGE?
>> Brown: BOB HOLEMAN CAME TO
THIS PROJECT AS A POEET.
HE AND FILMMAKER DAVID GRUBIN
TRAVELED FROM AUSTRALIA TO WALES
TO HAWAII LOOKING AT LANGUAGES
ON THE BRINK AND HOW SOME PEOPLE
ARE FIGHTING TO BRING THEM BACK.
I TALKEDDED WITH HOLEMAN
RECENTLY AT THE SMITHSONIAN
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM IN
WASHINGTON.
>> EACH OF THESE LANGUAGES HOLDS
A LITTLE PIECE OF INFORMATION OR
A LOT OF INFORMATION, CAN HOLD
INFORMATION ABOUT MEDICINES AND
HEALTH, CAN HOLD FOCUS ABOUT THE
CONSTELLATIONS IN THE SKY, AND
THAT'S INFORMATION THAT IF YOU
LOSE THE LANGUAGE, YOU LOSE THAT
CONNECTION WITH THAT PLACE, WITH
THAT WAY OF THINKING, WITH TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS OF THAT
LANGUAGE'S LINEAGE.
>> Brown: ONE CAUSE OF THE
LOSS OF LANGUAGES, OF COURSE,
LIVES AROUND THE GLOBE
INCREASINGLY INTERCONNECTED
THROUGH TECHNOLOGY, THE ECONOMY,
AND THE DOMINANCE OF A FEW
LANGUAGES, INCLUDING ONLINE.
>> EVERYBODY WANTS TO JOIN IN ON
THE CONVERSATION, BUT THERE'S NO
REASON.
>> Brown: THE BULLY LANGUAGES?
>> IT SEEMS ENGLISH AND MANDARIN
AND SPANISH ARE GOBBLING UP
LANGUAGES AS PEOPLE DECIDE THEY
NEED TO HAVE THIS IN ORDER TO
ASSIMILATE INTO A CULTURE.
BUT IF YOU-- INSTEAD OF FEELING
AWKWARD ABOUT SPEAKING ANOTHER
LANGUAGE, IF YOU WERE RESPECTED
FOR WHO YOU ARE AND IF THAT
BECAME PART OF THE FABRIC-- TALK
ABOUT A MULTICULTURAL FABRIC,
BUT IT SEEMS WE HAVE TO HAVE OUR
MULTI CULTURE CULTURES IN ENGLID
IT JUST SOUNDS SO MUCH MORE
DELIGHTFUL-- THERE ARE SO MANY
MORE OPPORTUNITIES IF YOU BEGIN
TO HEAR THE REAL DEAL.
>> Woodruff: GLOW AT THE SAME
TIME, ACCORDING TO
ANTHROPOLOGIST JOSHUA BELL, THE
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM'S
"RECOVERING VOICES" PROJECT,
TECHNOLOGY HAS OPENED UP NEW
WAYS TO PRESERVE NEW LANGUAGES.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE TALK ABOUT
HOW THE INTERNET, CELL PHONES
ARE REDUCING PEOPLE'S
LINGUISTICS RANGE, ET CETERA.
THE FLIP SIDE IS COMMUNITIES ARE
INCREASINGLY USING THESE TOOLS
TO CREATE SPACES FOR THENSELVES
SO YOU'LL SEE SPECIFIC CHEROKEE
LANGUAGES, FOR EXAMPLE,
FACEBOOK, APPFOR SMARTPHONES,
WHERE COMMUNITES AIRE ENGAGING.
>> Brown: IN THE FILM, HOLEMAN
SHOWS HOW EVEN LANGUAGES
SEEMINGLY VULNERABLE CAN
CONTINUE TO EXIST IN THE RIGHT
CONDITIONS. EXTRAORDINARY.
WE WERE ON AN ISLAND IN
AUSTRALIA THAT HAS 400 PEOPLE
AND 10 DIFFERENT LANGUAGES.
HOW--
>> Brown: 400 PEOPLE AND 10
LANGUAGES.
>> EXACTLY.
AND IN AUSTRALIA, THERE ARE
LANGUAGES THAT ARE QUITE STABLE
WITH ONLY 70 SPEAKERS OR 500
SPEAKERS, YOU KNOW.
HOW DOES THIS HAPPEN?
THIS HAPPENS BECAUSE IT'S NOT A
BIG DEAL FOR THESE PEOPLE TO
LEARN THESE LANGUAGES.
IT'S WHAT THEIR PARENTS DID, AND
THEIR PARENTS' PARENTS DID.
AND FOR THEM TO LEARN THE
LANGUAGE OF ANOTHER PEOPLE IS A
SIGN OF RESPECT, AND THAT'S
EXACTLY WHAT THE MOVEMENT NOW,
THE LANGUAGE MOVEMENT, IS TRYING
TO SAY, TO RESPECT THE MOTHER
TONGUES OF EACH OTHER IS THE WAY
THAT WE CAN KEEP LANGUAGES
ALIVE.
>> Brown: AN EXAMPLE OF THIS
HAS UNFOLDED IN WALES.
A WOMAN VISITED AN ANNUAL WELSH
LANGUAGE FESTIVAL TO SEE HOW THE
SMALL COUNTRY, PART OF THE
UNITED KINGDOM, HAS MANAGED TO
CREATE EQUAL FOOTING FOR ITS
NATIVE LANGUAGE ALONGSIDE
ENGLISH, GIVING IT A PLACE IN
SCHOOLS, IN BARS, EVEN IN
HIP-HOP.
HOLEMAN ATTEMPTED TO LEARN
ENOUGH WELSH TO RECITE HIS OWN
PEOPLE IN A LIVE COMPETITION.
WHAT'S THE KEY TO A LANGUAGE
SURVIVING?
>> A LANGUAGE SURVIVES IF YOU
HAVE THE CHOICE TO LEARN IT.
IF IT'S AVAILABLE FOR YOU TO
LIVE YOUR LIFE IN SOME WAY WITH
YOUR LANGUAGE AS PART OF YOU.
IN WALES, YOU HAVE A CHOICE OF
WHETHER TO GO TO AN ENGLISH
MEDIUM SCHOOL OR TO A WELSH
MEDIUM SCHOOL, AND INTHIS  WAY,
CHILDREN CAN LEARN IN THE
LANGUAGE THAT THEY ARE SPEAKING
AT HOME.
>> Brown: BUT COULDN'T YOU
MAKE THE THE ARGUMENT T
WOULD BE BETTER IF WE ALL SPOKE
THE SAME LANGUAGE, THAT WE ALL
UNDERSTOOD EACH OTHER?
THERE WOULD BE MORE
UNDERSTANDING IN THE WORLD.
>> WELL, I LOVE THAT ARGUMENT,
AND IT MAKES SO MUCH SENSE UNTIL
YOU UNDERSTAND WHAT
UNDERSTANDING IS.
YOU KNOW, LANGUAGE IS MUCH MORE
THAN COMMUNICATION.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT IT ON THE
SURFACE, THAT'S WHAT IT IS.
BUT LANGUAGE IS THE WAYWE
THINK, AND IT'S THE WAY IT'S
BEEN HANDED DOWN THROUGH
GENERATIONS.
IF YOU BEGIN TO THINK IN ANOTHER
LANGUAGE, THAT'S FINE.
BUT IF YOU HAVE TO LOSE THE WAY
THAT YOUR FAMILY HAS BEEN
SPEAKING, THAT'S NOT SO FINE.
THAT'S LOSING WHO YOU ARE.
AND WHEN WE LOSE WHO WE ARE,
THAT'S WHEN WE BECOME THIS
HOMOGENIZED CONSUMER OF LIFE,
RATHER THAN A CITIZEN WHO COMES
FROM A PLACE AND KNOWS WHO YOU
ARE.
>> Brown: AND THAT'S A
CONVERSATION THIS DOCUMENTARY
WANTS TO FACILITATE IN ANY
LANGUAGE.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
BLIZZARD CONDITIONS HOWLED
ACROSS MUCH OF NEW ENGLAND.
SNOWFALL TOTALS TOPPED TWO FEET
IN PLACES, AND WINDS GUSTED
ABOVE 75 MILES AN HOUR ALONG THE
COAST.
BUT IN NEW YORK, THE STORM
FAILED TO LIVE UP TO ITS
BILLING, AND ONE FORECASTER EVEN
APOLOGIZED FOR GETTING IT WRONG.
CORPORATE PROFIT WARNINGS AND A
DROP IN DURABLE GOODS ORDERS
SPOOKED WALL STREET, AND THE DOW
INDUSTRIALS LOST NEARLY 300
POINTS.
AND "ISLAMIC STATE" MILITANTS
THREATENED TO BEHEAD TWO MORE
HOSTAGES, ONE JAPANESE, ONE
JORDANIAN, BY TOMORROW
AFTERNOON.
THEY KILLED ANOTHER JAPANESE
HOSTAGE OVER THE WEEKEND.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT NOW
NEARLY A YEAR AND A HALF AGO,
PHOTOGRAPHER AMY SACKA
CHALLENGED HERSELF TO SHOOT A
PHOTO A DAY FOR 365 DAYS, ALL IN
THE CITY OF DETROIT.
NOW, 543 DAYS LATER, SHE'S STILL
DOCUMENTING STREET SCENES AND
PORTRAITS FROM THIS GREAT
AMERICAN CITY.
SEE WHAT SHE'S CAPTURED SO FAR
WE HAVE A VIDEO ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org newshour.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL EXPLORE
WHETHER THE U.S. AND IRAN SHOULD
FORGE A CLOSER RELATIONSHIP.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF
WE'LL SEE Y ON-OULINE
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.